hi I'm Luke and I study how ancient
marine Giants propel themselves through
the oceans with us my research was on
the hydrodynamics of PZ a source so this
is a pz I saw and they existed at the
same time as the dinosaurs and as you
can see they've got these four big
flippers but why have they got such
weird like flippers like nothing else in
the oceans has flippers like this why
did it swim like this what was the
advantage basically why I've been doing
Southampton is to use hydrodynamics and
aerospace engineering to work out how
these guys swamp we basically know from
the fossils and the bones that the
flippers would have moved up and down
but the kind of main question was how
did the front set and the rear sir move
in relation to each other did they all
go up and down together like an in phase
motion or did one go up as the other
went down or was it something else if
you imagine like a turtle swimming its
flipper essentially moves in this sort
of like figure of a motion and that is
comprised of three motion so you've got
what we call it a rolling rotation about
the shoulder then you've got like some
sort of forward to back sérgio tation
and then you've got a rotation of the
edge of flipper about its own axis which
is pitch what I found was basically
there's not one phase which is always
the best for pzo sauce and the reason
this is the case is because the front
flipper as it's flapping up and down it
generates this vortex tree so it
generates as it goes up it generates a
vortex which is then shed into the wake
and then as it goes down at the bottom
another vortex is generated so you get
these vortices that are like alternating
on each side of a road so we call this a
vortex street and why found basically is
that the hind flipper when it weaves in
between these vortices doesn't actually
touch them but just avoid them all the
time then the thrust and the efficiency
the hind flipper is increased so we're
getting increases of like 50% in first
at about a 50% increase in efficiency as
well which to an animal that's evolving
and try to outrun or swim a predator or
chase some prey a 50% increase in
efficiency or thrust is absolutely
humongous this gives a reason as to why
the plesiosaurs actually evolved and
maintained this a potion system for such
a long time so this representative shape
I found is not the whole flipper it's
only like the central skeletal structure
so what I essentially did was to measure
the bones of lots of different pleasee
assort fossils and then measure x-rays
of lots of different penguins so I
measure the bones on the penguin and
then the extent of soft tissue and that
gives me like a percentage of soft
tissue on the leading edge from the
training edge from that I can then apply
that do the mass in Reverse apply it to
the plesiosaur fossil to give me that
estimate of the soft tissue there's
essentially two main types of pzs or we
call these more four types or types
based on their morphology these types
which have a like a big head big teeth
these are thought to be active pursuit
predators so they would chase their prey
down like a great white shark or
something and they'd use their thrust
and high speed to just actively chase
down their prey and then you've got
these types which have got them yes you
can see how much longer neck and short
small head these so are what are called
ambush predators it's kind of slowly go
up to some shoulder fish and through the
element of surprise just catch a couple
now the flipper shapes of these two
different types of pzs or are different
this type Germany has long and thin
flippers and this type Germany has short
and fat flippers why what advantages do
those different paper shapes give each
type that's what I'm looking into you
know and the way I'm doing that is by
defining that kind of how long and
slender it is by a thing we call
aspect ratio so it aspect ratio is just
the ratio of essentially the span so the
length of the flipper to the average
cord length so this as you can see has
an aspect ratio of 3 which means it's
three times longer than it is wider
whereas this one has an aspect ratio of
seven and you can see it's much longer
but on average it's actually the same
width as the other one so hopefully I'll
find differences in performance between
these different flippers and therefore
be able to make some conclusions about
the differences in swimming between the
different types of plesiosaur
you